Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
=========================

The tidy data set is based on the "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data set Version 1.0" from Jorge L. *et al.*
The data set is available at: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

A full descriotion is available at: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

### Background of data set:
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained data set has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. The data set was split into a training and a test data set.

See also: *Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz.* Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

### Transformation of complete data set
The full data set of all 30 test subjects was generated by joining the two subsets. All 561 variable were labeled according to their feature name. Only the mean and standard deviation from the measurements for all subjects and activities were retained. Mean frequncies were rejected and not retained. The retained means and standard deviations were assigned to the respective test subject (1:30) and the activity ("walking", "walkingupstairs", "walkingdownstairs","sitting", "standing", "laying"). Next, the average of each observation mean and standard deviation for each activity and each subject was computed and stored in the tidy data set. Variable names and activity labels were transformed to lower case and stripped off special characters ("-", "_" and "()").

### Caveat ###
There is no problem of taking the mean of observation means for each subjects activity. However, just averaging the standard deviation of each measurement is not giving an accurate overall standard deviation. An overall standard deviation should be rather calculated like this: ```pSD =sqrt((n1-1)*(S1^2)+(n2-2)*(S2^2)+(ni-1)*(Si^2)/((n1+n2+ni)-k)``` s1,s2,si =  standard deviation from subgroups. n1,n2,ni = number of observation per subgroup. k = number of subgroups. To implement this for this project we would need to know from how many sub-measurments the standard deviations and means were calculated.  

### Files:
**Tidy dataset ( 180 observations of 68 variables):** results.csv

### Variables:

**Factors:**  
subject - test subject number (1:30)   
activities - activity during measurement ("walking", "walkingupstairs", "walkingdownstairs","sitting", "standing", "laying")  

**Measurements (Grand mean of mesurements and mean of standard deviation of measuremnts):**  
tbodyaccmeanx   
tbodyaccmeany   
tbodyaccmeanz  
tbodyaccstdx  
tbodyaccstdy  
tbodyaccstdz   
tgravityaccmeanx  
tgravityaccmeany  
tgravityaccmeanz  
tgravityaccstdx  
tgravityaccstdy  
tgravityaccstdz  
tbodyaccjerkmeanx  
tbodyaccjerkmeany  
tbodyaccjerkmeanz  
tbodyaccjerkstdx  
tbodyaccjerkstdy  
tbodyaccjerkstdz  
tbodygyromeanx  
tbodygyromeany  
tbodygyromeanz  
tbodygyrostdx  
tbodygyrostdy  
tbodygyrostdz  
tbodygyrojerkmeanx  
tbodygyrojerkmeany  
tbodygyrojerkmeanz  
tbodygyrojerkstdx  
tbodygyrojerkstdy  
tbodygyrojerkstdz  
tbodyaccmagmean  
tbodyaccmagstd  
tgravityaccmagmean  
tgravityaccmagstd  
tbodyaccjerkmagmean  
tbodyaccjerkmagstd  
tbodygyromagmean  
tbodygyromagstd  
tbodygyrojerkmagmean  
tbodygyrojerkmagstd  
fbodyaccmeanx  
fbodyaccmeany  
fbodyaccmeanz  
fbodyaccstdx  
fbodyaccstdy  
fbodyaccstdz  
fbodyaccjerkmeanx  
fbodyaccjerkmeany  
fbodyaccjerkmeanz  
fbodyaccjerkstdx  
fbodyaccjerkstdy  
fbodyaccjerkstdz  
fbodygyromeanx  
fbodygyromeany  
fbodygyromeanz  
fbodygyrostdx  
fbodygyrostdy  
fbodygyrostdz  
fbodyaccmagmean  
fbodyaccmagstd  
fbodybodyaccjerkmagmean  
fbodybodyaccjerkmagstd  
fbodybodygyromagmean  
fbodybodygyromagstd  
fbodybodygyrojerkmagmean  
fbodybodygyrojerkmagstd  
